---
layout: post
title: "矩阵分析与应用（二）"
subtitle: "第二章 矩形系统和阶梯形"
date: 2022-11-14
author: "夜雨声烦"
header-img: "img/bg2.png"
header-mask: 0.2
catalog: true
tags: [linear algebra]
---

# Chapter 2 Rectangular Systems and Echelon Forms

## 2.1 Row Echelon Form and Rank

### Modified Gaussian Elimination

Suppose that $\mathbf{U}$ is the augmented matrix associated with the system after $i − 1$ elimination steps have been completed. To execute the $i^{th}$ step, proceed as follows:

* Moving from left to right in $\mathbf{U}$, locate the first column that contains a nonzero entry on or below the $i^{th}$ position — say it is $\mathbf{U}_{*j}$.
* The pivotal position for the $i^{th}$ step is the $(i, j)$ -position.
* If necessary, interchange the $i^{th}$ row with a lower row to bring a nonzero number into the $(i, j)$ -position, and then annihilate all entries below this pivot.
* If row $\mathbf{U}_{i*}$ as well as all rows in $\mathbf{U}$ below $\mathbf{U}_{i*}$ consist entirely of zeros, then the elimination process is completed.

### Row Echelon Form

An $m \times n$ matrix $\mathbf{E}$ with rows $\mathbf{E}_{i*}$ and columns $\mathbf{E}_{*j}$ is said to be in `row echelon form` provided the following two conditions hold.

* If Ei∗ consists entirely of zeros, then all rows below $\mathbf{E}_{i*}$ are also entirely zero; i.e., all zero rows are at the bottom.
* If the first nonzero entry in $\mathbf{E}_{i*}$ lies in the $j^{th}$ position, then all entries below the ith position in columns $\mathbf{E}_{*1}$, $\mathbf{E}_{*2}$, ... , $\mathbf{E}_{*j}$ are zero.

### Rank of a Matrix

The entries in $\mathbf{E}$ are not uniquely determined by $\mathbf{A}$.Nevertheless, it can be proven that the "form" of $\mathbf{E}$ is unique in the sense that `the positions of the pivots in` $\mathbf{E}$ `are uniquely determined by the entries in` $\mathbf{A}$.

Suppose $\mathbf{A}_{m \times n}$ is reduced by row operations to an echelon form $\mathbf{E}$.The rank of $\mathbf{A}$ is defined to be the number

$$
\begin{align*}
rank (\mathbf{A}) &= \text{number of pivots} \\
&= \text{number of nonzero rows in} \;\mathbf{E} \\
&= \text{number of basic columns in} \;\mathbf{A},
\end{align*}
$$

where the `basic columns` of $\mathbf{A}$ are defined to be those columns in $\mathbf{A}$ that contain the pivotal positions.

> Pay particular attention to the fact that the basic columns are extracted from $\mathbf{A}$ and not from the row echelon form $\mathbf{E}$.

## 2.2 Reduced Row Echelon Form

A matrix $\mathbf{E}_{m \times n}$ is said to be in `reduced row echelon form` provided that the following three conditions hold.

* $\mathbf{E}$ is in row echelon form.

* The first nonzero entry in each row (i.e., each pivot) is 1.

* All entries above each pivot are 0.

If $\mathbf{A}$ is transformed by row operations to a `reduced` row echelon form $\mathbf{E}_{\mathbf{A}}$, then  both the "form" as well as the individual entries in $\mathbf{E}_{\mathbf{A}}$ are uniquely determined by $\mathbf{A}$. In other words, the reduced row echelon form $\mathbf{E}_{\mathbf{A}}$ produced from $\mathbf{A}$ is independent of whatever elimination scheme is used.

### $\mathbf{E}_{\mathbf{A}}$ Notation

For a matrix ${\mathbf{A}}$, the symbol $\mathbf{E}_{\mathbf{A}}$ will hereafter denote the unique reduced row echelon form derived from ${\mathbf{A}}$ by means of row operations.

### Column Relationships in $\mathbf{A}$ and $\mathbf{E}_{\mathbf{A}}$

* Each nonbasic column $\mathbf{E}_{*k}$ in EA is a combination (a sum of multiples) of the basic columns in $\mathbf{E}_{\mathbf{A}}$ to the left of $\mathbf{E}_{*k}$. That is,

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbf{E}_{*k} &= \mu_1 \mathbf{E}_{*b_1} + \mu_2 \mathbf{E}_{*b_2} + \dots + \mu_j \mathbf{E}_{*b_j}\\
&= \mu_1 \begin{pmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \\ \vdots \\ 0 \\ \vdots \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} + \mu_2 \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \\ \vdots \\ 0 \\ \vdots \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} + \dots + \mu_j \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 0 \\ \vdots \\ 1 \\ \vdots \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} \mu_1 \\ \mu_2 \\ \vdots \\ \mu_j \\ \vdots \\ 0 \end{pmatrix},
\end{align*}
$$

where the $\mathbf{E}_{*b_i}$'s are the basic columns to the left of $\mathbf{E}_{*k}$ and where the multipliers $\mu_i$ are the first $j$ entries in $\mathbf{E}_{*k}$.

* The relationships that exist among the columns of $\mathbf{A}$ are exactly the same as the relationships that exist among the columns of $\mathbf{E}_{\mathbf{A}}$. In particular, if $\mathbf{A}_{*k}$ is a nonbasic column in $\mathbf{A}$, then 

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbf{A}_{*k} &= \mu_1 \mathbf{A}_{*b_1} + \mu_2 \mathbf{A}_{*b_2} + \dots + \mu_j \mathbf{A}_{*b_j},
\end{align*}
$$

where the $\mathbf{A}_{*b_i}$'s are the basic columns to the left of $\mathbf{A}_{*k}$ and where the multipliers $\mu_i$ are the first $j$ entries in $\mathbf{E}_{*k}$.

In summary, the utility of $\mathbf{E}_{\mathbf{A}}$ lies in its ability to reveal `dependencies` in data stored as columns in an array $\mathbf{A}$. The nonbasic columns in $\mathbf{A}$ represent redundant information in the sense that this information can always be expressed in terms of the data contained in the basic columns.

## 2.3 Consistency of Linear Systems

A system of $m$ linear equations in $n$ unknowns is said to be a `consistent` system if it possesses at least one solution. If there are no solutions, then the system is called `inconsistent`.

### Consistency

Each of the following is equivalent to saying that $\left[\mathbf{A} \vert \mathbf{b} \right]$ is consistent.

* In row reducing $\left[\mathbf{A} \vert \mathbf{b} \right]$, a row of the following form never appears:
$$  
\left(0 \quad 0 \quad \dots \quad 0 \quad \vert \quad \alpha \right), \text{where} \alpha \neq 0. 
$$
* $\mathbf{b}$ is a nonbasic column in $\left[\mathbf{A} \vert \mathbf{b} \right]$. 

* $ rank\left[ \mathbf{A} \vert \mathbf{b} \right] = rank (\mathbf{A}) $. 

* $\mathbf{b}$ is a combination of the basic columns in $\mathbf{A}$.

## 2.4 Homogeneous Systems

A system of $m$ linear equations in $n$ unknowns

$$
\begin{equation*}
\begin{aligned}
a_{11}x_1 \; + \; a_{12}x_2 \; + \; \dots \; + \; a_{1n}x_n \; &= \; 0, \\
a_{21}x_1 \; + \; a_{22}x_2 \; + \; \dots \; + \; a_{2n}x_n \; &= \; 0, \\
\vdots \\
a_{m1}x_1 \; + \; a_{m2}x_2 \; + \; \dots \; + \; a_{mn}x_n \; &= \; 0,
\end{aligned}
\end{equation*}
$$

in which the right-hand side consists entirely of 0's is said to be a `homogeneous system`. If there is at least one nonzero number on the right-hand side, then the system is called `nonhomogeneous`.

The solution consisting of all zeros is referred to as the `trivial solution`.

### Summary

Let $\mathbf{A}_{m \times n}$ be the coefficient matrix for a homogeneous system of $m$ linear equations in $n$ unknowns, and suppose $rank(\mathbf{A}) = r$.

* The unknowns that correspond to the positions of the basic columns (i.e., the pivotal positions) are called the `basic variables`, and the unknowns corresponding to the positions of the nonbasic columns are called the `free variables`.

* There are exactly $r$ basic variables and $n − r$ free variables.

* To describe all solutions, reduce $\mathbf{A}$ to a row echelon form using Gaussian elimination, and then use back substitution to solve for the basic variables in terms of the free variables. This produces the `general solution` that has the form $$ x = x_{f_1} \mathbf{h_1} + x_{f_2} \mathbf{h_2} + \dots + x_{f_{n-r}} \mathbf{h_{n-r}} ,$$ where the terms $x_{f_1} , x_{f_2} , \dots , x_{f_{n-r}}$ are the free variables and where $\mathbf{h_1}, \mathbf{h_2}, \dots , \mathbf{h_{n-r}}$ are $n \times 1$ columns that represent particular solutions of the homogeneous system. The $\mathbf{h_1}$'s are independent of which row echelon form is used in the back substitution process. As the free variables $x_{f_i}$ range over all possible values, the general solution generates all possible solutions.

* A homogeneous system possesses a unique solution (the trivial solution) if and only if $rank(\mathbf{A}) = n$ — i.e., if and only if there are no free variables.

## 2.5 Nonhomogeneous Systems

$$
\begin{equation*}
\begin{aligned}
a_{11}x_1 \; + \; a_{12}x_2 \; + \; \dots \; + \; a_{1n}x_n \; &= \; b_1, \\
a_{21}x_1 \; + \; a_{22}x_2 \; + \; \dots \; + \; a_{2n}x_n \; &= \; b_2, \\
\vdots \\
a_{m1}x_1 \; + \; a_{m2}x_2 \; + \; \dots \; + \; a_{mn}x_n \; &= \; b_m,
\end{aligned}
\end{equation*}
$$

is said to be `nonhomogeneous` whenever $b_i \neq 0$ for at least one $i$.

### Summary

Let $\left[\mathbf{A} \vert \mathbf{b} \right]$ be the augmented matrix for a consistent $m \times n$ nonhomogeneous system in which $rank(\mathbf{A}) = r$.

* Reducing $\left[\mathbf{A} \vert \mathbf{b} \right]$ to a row echelon form using Gaussian elimination and then solving for the basic variables in terms of the free variables leads to the `general solution` $$x = \mathbf{p} + x_{f_1} \mathbf{h_1} + x_{f_2} \mathbf{h_2} + \dots + x_{f_{n-r}} \mathbf{h_{n-r}}.$$ As the free variables $x_{f_i}$ range over all possible values, this general solution generates all possible solutions of the system.

* Column $\mathbf{p}$ is a `particular solution` of the nonhomogeneous system.

* The expression $x_{f_1} \mathbf{h_1} + x_{f_2} \mathbf{h_2} + \dots + x_{f_{n-r}} \mathbf{h_{n-r}}$ is the `general solution` of the associated homogeneous system.

* Column $\mathbf{p}$ as well as the columns $\mathbf{h_i}$ are independent of the row echelon form to which $\left[\mathbf{A} \vert \mathbf{b} \right]$ is reduced.

* The system possesses a unique solution if and only if any of the following is true. 
  * $rank(\mathbf{A}) = r = n =$ number of unknowns. 
  * There are no free variables.
  * The associated homogeneous system possesses only the trivial solution.